# React Amsterdam February 14th 2024

## Durable Design systems

- [Reshaped Blog](https://reshaped.so/blog/)
- [Design System Checklist](https://designsystemchecklist.com/)
- [Blvd Dmitry](https://x.com/blvdmitry/)

If your DX suffers, your next published versions will have less conversion.

Approaches to avoid this situation are:

1. TDD (Test-Driven Development): Start by writing the perfect definition (simple) and then try to reach there gradually. Tip: You can even use Notion to write pseudo code before writing the actual code.
2. Systemic Changes: Align your changes and properties to be consistent throughout. Tidy up the component first. Leave comments or make a ticket to schedule making the changes for the major if you have breaking changes. ("Whisper design, scream system" system is more important than design when shipping the changes for multiple products.)
3. Escape hatches: You won't be able to cover all possible use-cases, so provide escape hatches to deprecated features or components. Use slots as a tool for composition.
4. #usetheplatform: Try to think more about DX and don't abstract the platform too much in order for the developers to instantly know what the prop, function they are looking for's purpose is. Try to use descriptive and known prop names, for example children, value, etc. Use the platform's features as much as possible. Another example, use the `as` prop instead of `component` prop.

## Observability for Frontend Engineers

Purpose: Acknowledge issues ideally before they arrive.

Cardinality:
The ability to rapidly analyze high cardinality fields is key to effective observability. It enables the identification of specific issues and their causes, such as pinpointing a user or a particular endpoint causing problems/

1. Monitoring
2. Logs
3. Traces

Lighthouse is not enough. It's a good start, but it's not enough.
Web vital metrics are only important if they're business critical (SEO). use tools like `web-vitals` to measure and monitor them. (Sentry already has a plugin for this.)
Measure page transition speed (Example: Check `window.performance`). Write performance tests and warn if the render count increases.

Actions:

1. Align on lower threshold
2. Align on improvement OKRs
3. Always Remember it's a continuous process

OPS:

- SLO (Service Level Objective)
- SLA (Service Level Agreement)
- SLI (Service Level Indicator) - to be close to SLO

UX metrics:

- Flow completion duration
- Flow completion rate
- Error rate (not just application errors, but also form errors)
- NPS (Net Promoter Score), CSAT (Customer Satisfaction), SUS (System Usability Scale)

Errors are usually obscure. We cannot investiagte all of them. Set up error budgets so you know if, for example, you passed 5% of users.
Put somebody on call for the issues that are critical for the business.

## Adaptive Web Apps

https://medhat.dev/

Adaptive loading involves delivering different experiences to different users based on their network and hardware constraints, specifically: A fast core experience for all users (including low-end devices). Progressively adding high-end-only features, if a user's network and hardware can handle it.

Challenges:

1. Device RAM, CPU
2. Browser
3. Connection

Performance optimization steps:

1. Measure
2. Fix
3. Repeat

Get real user data, not just lighthouse. get features support (version of browser), connection, device, user preferences.

Device distribution: See how much traffic is coming from different devices.

Connection trends: Device screen size, browser support, user preferences, device (CPU + RAM).

More into Components design rather than adaptive. But Components should fit anywhere.

Container width is stable, let's use it more. (91.1% of users have container queries support.)
https://caniuse.com/css-container-queries

Different image sizes (next/image) or optimize ahead of time. (AVIF, WebP, new formats)

Browser support:

- Fallback to MIME that the user supports videos and images. (Use `picture` and `source` tag)
- Polyfills (use browserversion to detect the browser version and load the polyfill only if needed)
- CSS `@supports` (bad support always remmember fallback to the basic version)
- Have a huge canvas like miro and figma? Use Offscreencanvas to render it in a web worker.

User preferences:

- Accessibility (dark mode, prefers-reduced-motion)
- Media queries (`prefers-`)
- always have the option to override the user preferences and set their own. useful for when the browser doesn't support the user preferences.

Device memory and CPU: (not supported in all browsers)

- `window.navigator.deviceMemory` - Don't show 3D models if the user doesn't have a lot of RAM.
- `window.navigator.hardwareConcurrency` - Maximum number of web workers. Don't use too many web workers if the user has a low CPUc count.
- Zoom in and out animations are resource-consuming. have a fallback for low-end devices.
- `window.navigator.connection` - `effectiveType` (4G, 3G, 2G, slow-2G), `saveData` (user has data saving mode on)

General tip: constantly test your app on low-end devices. deliver low-end experience even to high-end devices at first. Then progressively enhance the experience once you know the user can handle it. (Example: gather connection speed and device memory and CPU imperativly just by measuring the time it takes to load a big image, etc)

useful: https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/react-adaptive-hooks
